use crate::blog::BlogPost;

pub fn all_posts() -> Vec<BlogPost> {
    vec![onionhead_post()]
}

fn formal_web_dev_post() -> BlogPost { 
    BlogPost::new(
        "Formal Methods? In Your Web Dev? It's More Doable Than You Think", 
        "2026-04-19", 
        "formal-web-dev", 
    )
    .paragraph("This post describes how I use formal methods like TLA+ and ProVerif to develop web applications. We'll apply my particular process-- which is heavily influenced by this Usenix paper-- to build a real system: a capability system for contained agent deployments. In many domains, 'run once and done' code is totally fine. In others, security, correctness, performance, and reliability are absolutely critical. These methods target those kinds of domains, where the cost of system failure is much greater than the cost of a rigorous process. when the cost of rigor is much, much lower than it was at any point in the past. Formal methods are now cheap and accessible enough that they can realistically and successfully be used in any development project.") 
    .title("Preliminaries")
    .subtitle("What Is an Engineering Process?") 
    .colorbox_styled("#f3e5f5", "#7b1fa2", 2, "<strong>Definition 1.1.</strong><em>Engineering</em> is the application of scientific and mathematical methods to design, analyze, and verify solutions to practical problems under constraints of time, cost, and operational environment.")
    .paragraph("Disclaimer: this post has a bunch of hot and highly debatable takes about what is and isn't engineering, how engineering disciplines develop, and how software engineering 'should be' done. Obviously, these are just my opinions. I'm not that experienced and knowledgeable. Your opinions are probably worth a lot more than mine. That said, I do think that formal methods are going to get a lot more important over time. At the very least, they're something software people should spend more time thinking and talking about. I think there's sort of a crisis at the core of software, and it's caused by this question: 'How does 'software engineering' function as a technical discipline now that code generation is a solved problem?' I don't know the right answer. The process described in this post is just my 'best effort' at figuring out something that works for my very specific niche. My thinking is almost certainly wrong and oversimplified in lots of places. I'd welcome correction or conversation from anyone who finds this interesting.")
    .paragraph("Here's a history of engineering. Because it aims at rhetorical usefulness instead of historical accuracy, it's a completely revisionist account, full of gross inaccuracies and distortions. Exactly how I like my history: full of spicy lies. Anyways, here it is. All engineering disciplines develop along a similar trajectory. They start as crafts. Eventually, the work grows too complex, and the cost of failure grows too high. Society demands regulation. Regulation demands rigor. Science, finally, is applied to deliver that rigor. The result is what we recognize as a major engineering discipline. This is how chemical, aerospace and structural engineering all became engineering disciplines. It's a clear pattern. From master builders applying proportional rules, you get structural analysis and engineering. From barnstormers and bicycle mechanics, you get aerospace engineering. From telegraphy and tinkerers, you get circuit theory and electrical engineering. And from industrial chemists, you get MIT's Chemical Engineering curriculum and unit operations. In all these cases, the discipline evolves from a skilled craft at the specific point when science, scale, and regulation converge. When (A) the relevant science becomes accessible enough that practitioners can feasibly apply it, (B) the complexity and scale of the work starts to exceed what craft expertise can manage, and (C) the costs of failure begin to outweigh the costs of rigor, engineering emerges from craft. Practitioners adopt analytical methods to create and verify the behavior of novel designs. Standardized process abstractions are employed to interface between science and practical engineering. A discipline is established.") 
    .paragraph("The differences between engineering and craft practice are stark. In the craft phase, knowledge is acquired by apprenticeship. Craftsman learn by extensive, hands-on implementation experience. The 19th-century industrial chemist used judgment, taste, process recipes, and craft conventions. The contemporary chemical engineer uses science and math: thermodynamics, transport phenomena, hazops analysis, process abstractions. Both professionals produce the same output, i.e. chemicals and chemical products at scale. Both processes could not be more different. The industrial chemists couldn't prove that their designs satisfied specific requirements. Third-parties couldn't easily audit and verify their work. Accumulated experience and empirical evidence justified design decisions. The industrial chemist used a process recipe because 'it's always worked'. The chemist couldn't point to a documented, auditable chain of reasoning to justify every design and implementation step. A chemical engineer can. Today, third-parties regularly audit and verify the designs of chemical, aerospace, and structural engineers. This is possible only because these disciplines use proven, analytical methods to produce and verify outputs.") 
    .paragraph("The software industry is still in the craft or skilled trade phase. Junior developers acquire knowledge by apprenticeship. They learn to do the job by extensive hands-on implementation experience. When they do become seniors and start designing systems, outside of a few specific industry niches, they don't typically systematically apply theory, math, or science to produce these designs. They don't usually employ established theory to verify that their designs satisfy stated requirements. They use the judgment, taste, and experience they've honed over years of apprenticeship. And most software development decisions are not engineering decisions. The choice of which web framework to use, which design pattern, which project management method, which library: these are craft decisions made by craftsmen. This is not to diminish their work. A good craftsman in any field has deep, broad technical knowledge. They are extremely skilled. They deliver incredible value. But they are not engineers, any more than a carpenter is a structural engineer. Conflating craft and engineering disservices both and prevents the development of real rigor.")
    .paragraph("There's no reason that software engineering can't mature into an actual engineering discipline. The body of theory exists. Formal logic, information theory, type theory, probability theory, automata and complexity theory, distributed systems theory, queuing theory, cryptography, algorithm design and analysis-- these are well-established and well-understood. This theory can be systematically applied to the practice of software engineering. It will make the discipline more rigorous, and rigor matters. Stochastic generators, whether humans or LLMs, are unreliable. Where human life, privacy, satisfaction and well-being depend on the correctness and safety of engineered systems, unchecked unreliability in design processes is unacceptable. A rigorous process, based on scientific, formal, and mathematical methods, should be a quality minimum.") 
    .paragraph("Practicality is a common objection to this. Formal methods take too much time. They require rare and expensive expertise. In the past, given the extremely high cost of code implementation, this argument made sense. Code was expensive. Instantiating designs in programming languages required teams of full-time technical experts. Today, anyone with a web browser can access a 'Make This Thing Now' button. For $25/month, anyone can unlock and push that button over and over again and get working code. Code can be generated 'at the speed of thought', to quote the Two's Complement podcast. As a result, the practicality argument carries less weight. Computational assistants can generate candidate artifacts faster than anyone can verify them. This frees up time for design, analysis, and verification. You can learn and write TLA+ in the time that you would, pre-2025, have spent writing JavaScript. You can learn to apply queuing theory in the time that you would, pre-2025, have spent writing boilerplate. And you can justify your continued employment because following a rigorous process means that you're more than just a stochastic code generator, a QA reviewer or a meat-shield for an LLM. You're a technical professional and you're adding value through technical expertise.")
    .paragraph("Viability is another common objection. Even if formal methods are feasible, they don't work that well. You can use them to verify the correctness of a specification. That's not that useful, because you still need to verify the correctness of the implementation. The model checker can verify that a TLA+ specification is correct. There is a basically unbridgable gap between specification and implementation, though; no verification oracle can prove that your completed, compiling code is a correct implementation of the verified spec. This is a complex problem and this process uses several strategies to address it. All these strategies were taken directly from a textbook: (1) refinement, property-based testing, and runtime verification. Quote: 'Refinement transforms a specification through a series of correctness-preserving steps into an implementation. The steps are small enough to verify. The chain of steps constitutes a proof that the implementation satisfies the specification. Property-based testing generates random inputs, executes the implementation, and checks that the output satisfies properties derived from the specification. The test properties have to derive from the specification; ensuring this is the engineer's responsibility. Runtime verification is a defensive strategy which instruments the running system to check specification properties at runtime. If a property is violated, the system can halt, alert, or degrade gracefully. This is an acknowledgment that there is always some residual risk of implementation error. This risk can only be mitigated, never eliminated.'")
    .paragraph("Quote: 'A software system is well-engineered when every design decision can be traced to an analytical justification grounded in applicable theory, every stated requirement has been verified by a method appropriate to the engineering domain, and the entire chain of reasoning from requirements through design through verification is documented and auditable.'")
    .paragraph("The goal of this post is to produce a 'well-engineered' software system using the above definition of 'well-engineered'.")
}

fn onionhead_post() -> BlogPost {
    BlogPost::new(
        "Onionhead: a DIY Onion Router",
        "2026-04-01",
        "diy-onion-router",
    )
    .paragraph("This post describes how I built an onion router to run on my local machine. The system is named \"Onionhead\" in tribute to Todd Rundgren, who wrote a song by that name.")
    .title("Preliminaries")
    .subtitle("Why Care About Onion Routing?")
    .paragraph("Cryptography has historically focused on the protection of transmitted information, paying less attention to the shielding of information metadata. This metadata itself, however, can be a significant security and privacy concern. In countries where censorship is commonplace, simply accessing certain websites may mark you as a target for persecution. \"I have nothing to hide\", you might think, \"Why should I care who knows what websites I visit?\" That attitude, however, is only viable based on your position in a privileged present. Rights erode. What is protected today may be illegal tomorrow. And even in more mundane circumstances, it's often desirable to control what you disclose about yourself and how it gets disclosed. An onion router gives you a greater degree of control. It effectively covers your tracks as you travel across a network by protecting information metadata, like what website you visited at a certain time. It prevents passive observers from linking site access requests to the individuals making those requests. That makes it broadly useful, both for things like censorship resistance and also smuggling cocaine.")    
    .paragraph("The social consequences of the technology are, thankfully, out of scope here; this post strictly focuses on 'how it works'.  To better understand that, we're going to build an onion router.")
    .colorbox_styled("#f3e5f5", "#7b1fa2", 2, "<strong>Definition 1.1.</strong> An <em>onion router</em> is a system of internetworked proxies which apply a protocol of successive encryption in order to protect information <em>metadata</em>.")
    .subtitle("Tools and Setup")
    .paragraph("Containerlab is a containerized network simulator, built on Docker. We're going to use it to configure our network topology.")
    .colorbox("#e8eaf6", "<strong>Note</strong> You need Docker to run containerlab. If you're reading this tutorial-style, this post assumes that you already have Docker installed. You can just run this Docker command to install containerlab: 'docker pull ghcr.io/srl-labs/clab'")
    .title("Configuring a Network with Containerlab")
    .paragraph("A virtual lab is a simulation of a complex network that runs on a single machine. A lab is built by defining a network topology. Where a network is the whole set of interconnected components and connections, the complete system, a network topology is an abstraction and specification of a network. It's just a set of nodes and a set of edges.")
    .colorbox_styled("#e8f5e9", "#2e7d32", 2, "Containerlab is a batteries-included, FOSS tool for building and running virtual labs. It gives you everything you need to define, run, and analyze labs out-of-the-box.")
    .paragraph("Here's an example of a network topology .yaml definition file:")
    .code_block(r"
        # topology documentation: http://containerlab.dev/lab-examples/two-srls/
        name: srl02 

        topology: 
            nodes:
                srl1: 
                    kind: nokia_srlinux
                    image: ghcr.io/nokia/nokia_srlinux
                    startup-config: srl1.cfg
                srl2: 
                    kind: nokia_srlinux 
                    image: ghcr.io/nokia/srlinux 
                    startup-config: srl2.cfg 

            links: 
                - endpoints: ['srl1:e1-1', 'srl2:e1-1']", "latex") 

}
